e c o l o g i c a l m o d e l l i n g 195 (2006) 205–218

available at www.sciencedirect.com

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ecolmodel

Towards a model of cyanobacteria life cycle—effects of
growing and resting stages on bloom formation
of N2 -ﬁxing species
Inga Hense a,b∗ , Aike Beckmann a
a Division of Geophysics, Department of Physical Sciences, P.O. Box 64, University of Helsinki, 00014 Helsinki, Finland
b Finnish Environment Institute, P.O. Box 140, 00251 Helsinki, Finland

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:

Cyanobacteria blooms are a common phenomenon in aquatic environments but although

Received 30 March 2005

considerable effort has been devoted to study various aspects of bloom formation, the pro-

Received in revised form 16 August

cesses involved are still not fully understood. Most of the factors that have been investigated

2005

can be categorised as external (e.g. N/P-ratio, temperature), whereas internal factors on the

Accepted 1 November 2005

generation of cyanobacteria blooms through their distinctive life cycle have not yet been

Published on line 4 January 2006

sufﬁciently considered. To ﬁll this gap and to investigate the dynamics of cyanobacteria life
cycles, a numerical model has been developed. The model assumes that the life cycle is

Keywords:

governed by the internal energy and nitrogen quotas of the cells, and discriminates four

Akinetes

different stages: vegetative cells, vegetative cells with heterocysts, akinetes and recruiting

Cyanobacteria

cells (including germinates). The seasonal succession of life stages is simulated in a one-

Heterocysts

dimensional framework, and a typical bloom is successfully simulated with a set of plausible

Internal quotas

parameters. Observed interannual variations in the relative proportions of different life cycle

Life cycle

stages can be explained as the direct result of life cycle dynamics. The results show that life

Model

cycle simulations are feasible and can be used to test hypotheses and to determine sensitivities regarding the role of cyanobacteria life cycles in marine and limnic environments.
Our study indicates that prediction of cyanobacteria blooms has to be based on a detailed
knowledge of all stages of the life cycle.
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1.

Introduction

Bloom-forming cyanobacteria species occur in freshwater,
brackish or coastal as well as in marine waters. In most cases
their blooms are visible to the naked eye as they appear in
dense concentrations near the surface. The effects of mass
accumulation range from inducing oxygen depletion after the
collapse of the blooms (Trimbee and Prepas, 1988), to clogging
of the feeding apparatus of suspension feeding zooplankton
(Webster and Peters, 1978) to producing and releasing toxins

∗

Corresponding author. Tel.: +358 9 191 51010; fax: +358 9 191 51000.
E-mail address: ihense@iki.ﬁ (I. Hense).

0304-3800/$ – see front matter © 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2005.11.018

by several species (Rouhilainen et al., 1995; Codd et al., 1999).
On the other hand, cyanobacteria are of biogeochemical signiﬁcance. Most bloom-forming species are able to ﬁx N2 and
thus bring new nitrogen into nitrogen limited systems (Karl et
al., 1997; Larsson et al., 2001).
During the past decades an increase of cyanobacteria
blooms in aquatic systems has been detected and mainly
attributed to global warming, eutrophication as well as the
dispersal of cells through ship trafﬁc (e.g. Kahru et al., 1994;
Sellner et al., 2003). However, the main factors triggering

206

e c o l o g i c a l m o d e l l i n g 195 (2006) 205–218

or controlling cyanobacteria blooms have not yet been fully
understood.
In general, low concentrations of dissolved inorganic nitrogen (DIN) and a surplus of phosphorus (DIP) are considered
prerequisites for enhanced growth and bloom formation of N2 ﬁxing cyanobacteria (Kahru et al., 2000). This can explain the
occurrence of cyanobacteria after the spring bloom of phytoplankton, when DIN is exhausted whereas DIP is still available.
In addition to low DIN/DIP ratios several other factors are
thought to stimulate bloom formation of cyanobacteria: warm
water temperatures under calm weather conditions and the
corresponding strong stratiﬁcation are assumed to be necessary. Under severe nutrient depleted conditions, the ability
of some cyanobacteria species to take up dissolved organic
phosphorus (Huber and Hamel, 1985; Mulholland et al., 2002)
and/or to control their buoyancy (Walsby et al., 1995; Villareal
and Carpenter, 2003) may lead to a distinctive advantage over
phytoplankton. Other hypotheses for the success of some
species include, e.g. a reduced grazing pressure (due to their
harmfulness) or the exclusion of competition (due to shading
effects by forming surface scums).
As can be seen from the list above, the main focus of
research has been on the factors directly inﬂuencing the
growth and bloom period of cyanobacteria. However, many
of the bloom-forming cyanobacteria species are also known
to have a complex life cycle which include several cell differentiation processes and allow the species to adapt to and
withstand environmental variations (e.g. the seasonal cycle) to
a certain degree. Some of the aforementioned external factors
also affect other stages of the life cycle. For example, a low
DIN/DIP-ratio has been found to stimulate the germination
of the resting spores of cyanobacteria (Ståhl-Delbanco et al.,
2003). However, the role of the life cycle itself, i.e. whether the
bloom is triggered or controlled by individual stages, is one of
the least investigated aspects. This is even more surprising, as
several observations indicate that the resting spores might act
as an inoculum for the next growth period (e.g. Huber, 1984).
Therefore, this model study concentrates on the dynamics of
the life cycle of bloom-forming cyanobacteria in nitrogen limited waters.
In recent years, a number of numerical models have
been developed for speciﬁc physiological (e.g. Stephens et
al., 2003), biogeochemical (e.g. Neumann et al., 2002) or
ecological processes. Most of these models focus on the
growth phase and thus concentrate on the nitrogen ﬁxation stage of cyanobacteria (e.g. Neumann et al., 2002). Models which include cyanobacteria to predict toxic or harmful
blooms for management purposes also concentrate exclusively on the “blooming” phase (e.g. Robson and Hamilton,
2004; Arhonditsis and Brett, 2005a,b). To our knowledge only
one model (e.g. Howarth et al., 1999) distinguishes between
nitrogen-ﬁxing and non-nitrogen ﬁxing cells. More elaborate life cycle models exist for zooplankton (e.g. Miller et
al., 1998; Fennel, 2001), but these have not been adopted
for phytoplankton or cyanobacteria. One exception is the
model by Yamamoto et al. (2002), Yamamoto and Seike (2003),
which considers the formation of resting spores of a harmful dinoﬂagellate. However, they do not include the whole
life cycle and a feedback loop between the produced resting spores and the growth period is missing. Instead, ger-

mination is prescribed from observed abundance of resting
cysts.
In this study we will make use of the available information
on the life cycle of bloom-forming cyanobacteria (Section 2)
to build a conceptual framework and a numerical model (Section 3) for the investigation of the effects of stage succession
on bloom formation. The results of a reference and several
sensitivity experiments are presented in Section 4; they are
discussed and summarised in Sections 5 and 6.

2.
Current knowledge about cyanobacteria
life cycle
Complete information about cyanobacteria life cycle does
not exist. The main part of our knowledge is derived from
bloom-forming and/or often harmful and toxic cyanobacteria genus in lakes or coastal areas. In most lakes non-nitrogen
ﬁxing cyanobacteria dominate due to phosphorus limitation
(e.g. Microcystis). The majority of cyanobacteria species in the
nitrogen-limited areas such as estuaries, coastal regions and
some lakes are nitrogen ﬁxing species (e.g. Anabaena, Aphanizomenon, Gloeotrichia, Nodularia). Their life cycle is characterised by several cell differentiation processes in response
to internal and external factors. Although large differences in
number, sequence and duration of the individual stages have
been found for those species which belong to the order Nostocales, important characteristics are described in the following.
The growth phase of bloom-forming cyanobacteria is
mainly restricted to the summer months due to their strong
temperature-dependent growth rate, which has typically its
optimum at about 25 ◦ C and higher (Fogg et al., 1973; Robarts
and Zohary, 1987; Lehtimäki et al., 1997). Primary production
and growth is carried out by vegetative cells which occur in
a chain-like colony, the so-called ﬁlaments. The qualitative
demands on nutrients and light of these cells are quite similar to phytoplankton cells. An advantage of cyanobacteria cells
is that they own gas vacuoles1 which enable them to adjust
their position in the water column to a certain degree (Oliver,
1994). Enhanced light capture can thus be obtained by ﬂoating
to the surface. While light limitation for these cells is unlikely
to occur during summer, the situation is different for nitrogen.
Nitrogen exhaustion after the spring bloom is a common
phenomenon in marine and brackish waters which strongly
limits phytoplankton growth and hence also restricts the
growth of vegetative cyanobacteria cells. However, cyanobacteria respond to nitrogen deﬁciency by carrying out a cell differentiation, i.e. the depletion of intracellular nitrogen induces
differentiation into heterocysts. These specialised cells, which
appear at almost regular intervals within or terminal of
the colony, ﬁx nitrogen for the entire ﬁlament. Additional
envelopes and the lack of the photosystem II protect the
enzyme nitrogenase (which is necessary for N2 ﬁxation) from
being destroyed by oxygen (Meeks and Elhai, 2002 and references therein). The assimilated nitrogen compounds are
exported to adjacent vegetative cells while the photosyn-

1
A gas vacuole is composed of a number of gas vesicles which
are closed gas-containing structures.

e c o l o g i c a l m o d e l l i n g 195 (2006) 205–218

thetic carbon products are transported into the heterocysts.
The energy required for nitrogen ﬁxation signiﬁcantly exceeds
that of uptake of dissolved inorganic nitrogen and leads to
reduced growth rates by roughly a factor of 2 (Stephens et al.,
2003). Furthermore, observations indicate that nitrogen ﬁxation needs phosphorous, and more iron and molybdenum
than non-ﬁxing cells (Howarth et al., 1988). It is noteworthy
that the differentiation process into heterocysts is inhibited
in the presence of dissolved inorganic nitrogen and that ordinary nitrogen uptake does not occur when heterocysts exist
(Adams and Duggan, 1999; Meeks and Elhai, 2002). Whereas
in the preliminary stage of heterocysts (proheterocysts) a redifferentiation back into vegetative cells is possible, mature
heterocysts are not able to regress.
After summer, decreasing temperature leads to reduced
metabolic activities such as N2 ﬁxation and nutrient uptake.
In addition, the reduced solar radiation leads to an energy
deﬁciency. It is not known to what extent the high energy
demanding heterocysts are responsible for the energy deﬁciency and thus affect the fate of the ﬁlaments. But we do know
that for a number of species vegetative cells turn into resting spores, so-called akinetes. While increased light limitation
is generally attributed to be the main triggering factor, it has
been also proposed that any decline in cell division induced
e.g. by nutrient (especially phosphate) limitation contributes
to the formation of akinetes (Adams and Duggan, 1999 and
references therein). These generally larger and thick-walled
cells have a higher density than water and sink to the bottom.
They are known to survive unfavourable conditions for several
months to several decades (Adams and Duggan, 1999), that is
65–130 times longer than vegetative cells (Sutherland et al.,
1979; Yamamoto, 1995).
Laboratory experiments with akinetes indicate, that they
need a certain time to mature. Even when the external
conditions are favourable again shortly after the differentiation process, germination would not occur immediately
(Karlsson, 1999). Instead, it seems that a certain internal
energy and/or nutrient level has to be reached before germination is initiated again. Nevertheless, positive effects on germination by enhanced nutrient concentrations (mainly phosphate) (Adams and Duggan, 1999) and resuspension into the
water column (Verspagen et al., 2004) have been recorded.
Other studies indicate that the germination process is furthermore accelerated by higher temperatures (Barbiero, 1993).
The recruitment of the water column begins with the
release of the germling which will turn into a vegetative cell. It
is followed by the formation of gas vesicles which enable the
cells to ﬂoat to the surface. However, some species have a benthic growth period before they rise. Our knowledge about gas
vesicle formation relies mostly on studies during the bloom
phase of cyanobacteria. It is known to increase during light
limitation and to decrease during nitrogen limitation (Oliver,
1994; Walsby et al., 1995). Whereas the former causes the cells
to ascend to the surface the latter induce that the cells either
remain neutrally buoyant or even sink.
The synthesis of gas vesicles is a relatively slow (>1 day
(Oliver, 1994)) and probably also a highly energy demanding
process. In some species gas vacuoles are synthesised in short
ﬁlaments called hormogonia. The main function of these ﬁlaments seems to support the dispersal of cyanobacteria cells

207

(Damerval et al., 1991; Meeks and Elhai, 2002). They are able to
take up dissolved inorganic nitrogen and to photosynthesise
but the energy required for the production of gas vacuoles (and
other substances necessary for motility, e.g. gliding) is too high
to support growth (Meeks and Elhai, 2002). In contrast to the
irreversible differentiation of vegetative cells into heterocysts,
a re-transformation of hormogonia into vegetative ﬁlaments
can take place and results in the loss of gas vacuoles.
Once cyanobacteria cells have recolonised the surface layer
(which takes about a few days to a few weeks), the growth
phase of cyanobacteria starts again. Fig. 1 shows the conceptual picture emerging from the above pieces of the puzzle.

3.

A model for the cyanobacteria life cycle

The compilation of the often scattered facts about cyanobacteria life cycle in the previous section indicates that much
remains to be studied in this respect, both in ﬁeld studies and laboratory settings. However, the existing picture
is detailed enough to begin putting forward a “prototype”
life cycle, that includes the most important processes and
can be implemented into a numerical model for further
investigation.
To our knowledge, this has not been attempted yet, presumably mostly because no theoretical basis was available. However, recent advances in modelling internal quotas
(Geider et al., 1998; Janowitz and Kamykowski, 1999; Baird et
al., 2004; Beckmann and Hense, 2004), following the original
idea by Droop (1973) and thus the inclusion of the history of
organisms and populations have paved the way for a numerical investigation of cyanobacteria life cycle dynamics.
Our main goal is not to “hindcast” a speciﬁc set of observations, but rather to transform the existing knowledge into
a set of model equations that may serve to initiate additional research into the matter. Such a life cycle model has
to rely on generalisations and simpliﬁcations and cannot be
expected to represent all details of a single species. Parts
of the current version may even turn out to be inadequate
for the description of the population development in some
cases. Yet we believe that it will serve as a valuable tool that
stimulates discussions as a necessary step in our quest for
understanding.

3.1.

The EQN approach for cyanobacteria

The basis for our modelling approach is the EQN (energy–
quota–nutrient) model concept of Beckmann and Hense
(2004), because we want to describe differentiation processes
that most likely depend on the internal energy and nitrogen
status of the cells. This model was originally applied to a
diel migration problem, where the migratory behaviour was
a function of internal energy and nitrogen quota alone. The
model successfully reproduced a number of phytoplankton
distribution patterns, like multiple subsurface maxima. With
a few suitable modiﬁcations, this model will be used here for
studying the cyanobacteria life cycle.
Like in the Beckmann and Hense (2004) approach, the
model employed in this study uses three compartments to
describe the state of cyanobacteria: the organic cell com-

208

e c o l o g i c a l m o d e l l i n g 195 (2006) 205–218

Fig. 1 – Schematic summary ﬁgure of the cyanobacteria life cycle (prototype for species of the order Nostocales). Vegetative
cells grow only until nitrogen depletion forces them to build heterocysts, thus enabling the cells to grow further by nitrogen
ﬁxation. At the end of summer vanishing light prevents further growth; some of the cells differentiate into akinetes, the
resting spores which sink to the bottom where they take up nutrients and mature during winter and spring. Finally, if the
conditions are sufﬁciently favourable the cells germinate and begin to rise to the surface with the help of gas vacuoles.
Here, light is abundant and growth of vegetative cells takes place, starting the life cycle again.

pounds C, the intracellular stored inorganic nitrogen S and the
gross stored energy G. Changes in these compartments are due
to light capture, nitrogen uptake or ﬁxation, growth, mortality
and deposition. The second central point of the model is the
subdivision into subcompartments, depending on the internal quotas E = G/C and Q = S/C of the organisms, resulting in
four categories:

• cells with high energy—high nitrogen quota (HH) can be

•
•
•

identiﬁed as vegetative cells without heterocysts, because it
is plausible to assume that they exhibit “normal behaviour"
(i.e. nitrogen uptake and growth);
cells with high energy—low nitrogen quota (HL) are
regarded as vegetative cells with heterocysts which use the
available energy to ﬁx (rather than uptake) nitrogen;
cells with low energy—low nitrogen quota (LL) represent
the akinetes, resting spores with a reduced metabolism;
and ﬁnally,
cells with low energy—high nitrogen quota (LH) are those in
the early recruiting stages (germinates and young ﬁlaments
of vegetative cells), concentrating on uptake rather than
growth.

It is important to note that an increase of the model’s internal nitrogen quota is only due to uptake and that the ﬁxated
nitrogen is used immediately for growth (as long as there is
sufﬁcient energy). This distinction between the two sources
of nitrogen (that leads to the speciﬁc treatment of the heterocyst stage) is motivated by ﬁndings that nitrogen ﬁxation
is energy- and not substrate-limited (LaRoche and Breitbarth,

2005), that thus no growth restrictions due to nitrogen limitation apply, and that nitrogen (i.e. ammonium) which has
been taken up by the cell is metabolized differently than
ammonium derived from nitrogen ﬁxation (Meeks and Elhai,
2002 and references therein). In particular, we thus assume
that the life cycle is regulated by the quotas for energy and
uptaken nitrogen, the latter being low during the heterocyst
stage.
The boundaries between these categories are determined
by the threshold values E and Q for internal energy quota and
internal nitrogen quota, respectively. This 2×2 matrix enables
us to consider the “history” of the population, the evolution
of their nutritional and energetic status and thereby the life
cycle. Fig. 2 illustrates the conceptual subdivision.
Adopting this classiﬁcation, the life cycle of cyanobacteria
turns out to be the sequence of stages, starting with vegetative
cells: they behave like normal phytoplankton cells as long as
they ﬁnd external nitrogen for uptake. Shortly after the external nitrogen is depleted, the internal nitrogen quota drops,
and below a certain threshold value, uptake is replaced by ﬁxation. This can be maintained as long as there is enough energy
to ﬁx nitrogen. With decreasing light availability, the internal
energy quota also drops and the cells enter the state of resting spores, where they slowly take up nitrogen. To close the
loop, we assume that akinetes increase their internal nitrogen
quota until they belong into the recruiting category, appropriately described (within this context) by their low energy-high
nitrogen quota. Once at high nitrogen quota the cells may gain
enough energy at the surface to turn into normal vegetative
cells again.

209

e c o l o g i c a l m o d e l l i n g 195 (2006) 205–218

Fig. 2 – Schematic ﬁgure of cyanobateria life cycle model. Largely following the overview (Fig. 1), the four boxes indicate
which states and processes are merged into one of the four functional groups. Vegetative cells (VEG) with a high energy and
nitrogen quota grow until the internal nitrogen quota cannot be reﬁlled by uptake of external nitrogen. The transfer into the
subcompartment vegetative cells with heterocysts (HET), which are characterised by high energy but low nitrogen levels,
enables the cells to grow further on by nitrogen ﬁxation. Decreasing energy supply at the end of summer drains the stored
energy and initiates the transfer into the subcompartment akinetes (AKI), which have low levels of energy and nitrogen.
These resting spores sink to the bottom where they slowly take up nitrogen, without growing. After the internal nitrogen
quota is sufﬁciently ﬁlled the cells are transferred into the recruiting compartment (REC). These low energy, high nitrogen
quota cells rise to the surface, where they replenish their energy reservoir, becoming vegetative cells again.

In addition to this classiﬁcation by internal quotas, we
ascribe different characteristics to each phase: recruiting and
vegetative cells (with and without heterocysts) are buoyant,
while akinetes sink. Only vegetative cells with heterocysts can
ﬁx N2 (which is assumed to be more energy consuming than
normal uptake), akinetes have signiﬁcantly reduced light capture and nitrogen uptake capacity as well as mortality.
We realize that this “life cycle”, although plausible, contains a large number of simpliﬁcations and omissions, especially the complexity of germination is not represented in
detail. However, given the state of our knowledge about
cyanobacteria life cycles it is difﬁcult to add further details
without losing the conceptual clarity of the approach. The
main idea was to ﬁnd a uniﬁed framework for describing the
life cycle and to incorporate as many solid facts as possible
without losing general applicability of the results.

3.2.

Phytoplankton, detritus and nitrogen

The biological part of our model is completed by adding
a simple passive (non-migrating) phytoplankton compartment P, necessary for a realistic representation of the seasonal cycle of nitrogen. The growth of phytoplankton and
the uptake of cyanobacteria are sinks in the nitrogen compartment, the sources are remineralisation and boundary
ﬂuxes. Finally, the detritus compartment changes in accor-

dance with gain from cyanobacteria and phytoplankton mortality and loss through remineralisation. We assume sinking
of detritus as well as some (permanent) deposition at the
bottom.

3.3.

The mathematical formulation

The resulting cyanobacteria EQN-based life cycle model with
six prognostic variables (see Table 1) reads:
∂G
= ωlc L (1 − (E/Emax )n )C − ωup (1 − Q )N E C −
∂t


 


light capture

nitrogen uptake

− ωgr Q E C − G − wbuoy

mωfx E C

  

nitrogen ﬁxation

∂G
− ıCG|−H
∂z

  

   

  

cyano growth

mort.

deposition

buoyancy

(1)

Table 1 – Prognostic variables for the cyanobacterial
EQN-based life cycle model
Nitrogen (mmol N m−3 )
Gross stored energy (mmol N m−3 )
Internally stored nitrogen (mmol N −3 )
Organic cyanobacterial nitrogen (mmol N m−3 )
Organic phytoplanktonic nitrogen (mmol N m−3 )
Detritus (mmol N m−3 )
Temperature (◦ C)

N
G
S
C
P
D
T

210

e c o l o g i c a l m o d e l l i n g 195 (2006) 205–218

∂S
∂S
= ωup (1 − Q )N E C − ωgr Q E C − S − wbuoy
− ıCS|−H
∂t
∂z







nitrogen uptake

  

   

  

cyano growth

mort.

deposition

buoyancy

(2)
∂C
∂C
= ωgr Q E C + ωfx E C − C − wbuoy
− ıC2 |−H
∂t
∂z

  

      

  

cyano growth

ﬁxation

mort.

deposition

∂P
P
= ωgr
 L N P −  P P −
∂t
   



phyto growth

mort.

buoyancy

P2

remin.

E = 1 −

grazing loss

phyto growth

(5)



 

mort.

remin.

  

2

− ıD |−H

sedimentation

  

(6)

deposition

The ﬁrst three equations describe the cyanobacteria, their
energy G, internal nitrogen S and structural biomass C. The
gross energy G is given in “nitrogen units” (mmol N m−3 ), so
that no further conversion factors need to be applied. The
factor m(=3) in the energy equation represents the increased
energy consumption for ﬁxation. Equations for phytoplankton
biomass, nitrogen and detritus complete our system.
Some parameters are valid for the entire system: as in
Beckmann and Hense (2004), the light limitation factor is
deﬁned as
L = 

˛I(z)
2 + ˛2 I(z)2
ωlc

where ˛ is the initial slope of the PI-curve, and the photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) is computed including selfshading as



I(z) = Is exp

 z

kw z + k c



(C(z ) + P(z ))dz

0

with z negative downward. Nitrogen uptake is limited by the
external availability of nitrogen
N =

N
kN + N

with kN assumed equal for cyanobacteria and phytoplankton.

3.3.1. Cyanobacteria
3.3.1.1. General metabolism. The temperature dependence of
the main cell processes of cyanobacteria is given by
ω = ω0 0.022 +

E
−1
Emax

n

The form of E assumes that uptake and growth do not slow
down before the energy reserves are almost exhausted.
The partitioning between growth and uptake is regulated
by Q ; below a critical value of nitrogen quota Qc more energy
is used for uptake than for growth and vice versa:

nitrogen uptake

∂D
∂D
= C + S + P P − rN D − wsink
∂t
∂z



(3)

(4)

∂N
P
= rN D − ωgr
L N P − ωup (1 − Q )N E C
∂t
    



Following Beckmann and Hense (2004), light capture is also
limited by a maximum storage capacity, expressed by the term
(1 − (E/Emax )n ) (n large and even) with Emax = 1, i.e. the internal
energy storage is assumed to be as large as the energy stored
in the organic material. Both uptake and growth are limited
by the internally available energy

1
0.25 + e(3/(T−12)−0.5) + e−(500/(T−12)−25)

Q =

Q
Qc + Q

For nitrogen ﬁxation, this dynamic partitioning concept is not
applicable, since this process is assumed to be independent
of the internal nitrogen quota, which quickly approaches zero
due to exponential growth.
Cyanobacteria mortality is represented as a linear term (),
assuming that cyanobacteria are not subject to zooplankton
grazing due to their harmful characteristics. Deposition at the
sea ﬂoor (ı), however, depends quadratically on the available
biomass.

3.3.1.2. Properties of cyanobacteria categories. Based on their
internal quotas, cyanobacteria are subdivided into four subcompartments (categories). The speciﬁcation of the parameters for the four subcompartments is summarised in
Table 2.
In particular, we assume that vegetative cells without heterocysts (VEG) have equal uptake and growth rates, that the
growth rate of vegetative cells with heterocysts (HET) is ω
(Lehtimäki et al., 1997) and that akinetes (AKI) and recruiting cells (REC) do not grow (but only capture light and take up
nitrogen). Note that the concept of the EQN model assumes
that light capture is limited by L , while uptake, growth and
ﬁxation are not. Hence, the sum of the coefﬁcients for uptake,
ﬁxation and growth do not have to equal the light capture
value. A slightly larger light capture rate is prescribed to allow
for metabolic activities (e.g. growth) during darkness (Smith,
1982). Mortality rates are the same except for akinetes, who
are believed to have much higher life expectance. Sinking and
rising at the various stages is implemented by constant velocities as indicated in the table.
Again we want to point out that we have used the most simple assumptions, which are not meant to accurately describe
any speciﬁc species in a speciﬁc environmental setting. Reﬁnements can be applied, if supported by sufﬁcient evidence.

(7)

with ω0 = 2.8 × 10−6 s−1 . This functional dependence reﬂects a
signiﬁcant growth rate for the temperature range 13–35◦ , with
a maximum of about 0.25 per day at 30 ◦ C (Lehtimäki et al.,
1997) and a background value of one per year for cold temperatures.

3.3.1.3. Transfer between categories. Additional assumptions
have to be made about the redistribution of biomass between
different categories. Again, we follow the approach of
Beckmann and Hense (2004), but with an adjustment of the
transfer time scale: since the seasonal cycle, not the diurnal
cycle, is our main concern, the time scale was increased from

211

e c o l o g i c a l m o d e l l i n g 195 (2006) 205–218

Table 2 – Characteristics of cyanobacteria subcompartments

VEG (veg. cells w/o heterocysts)
HET (veg. cells with heterocysts)
AKI (akinetes)
REC (recruiting cells)

HH
HL
LL
LH

ωlc /ω

ωup /ω

ωgr /ω

ωfx /ω

/0

ı/ı0

w/wmig

5
5
0.5
5

4
0
0.4
4

4
1
0
0

0
1
0
0

1
1
0.01
1

0
0
1
0

0.1
0.1
-10
1

Reference values are 0 = 1.5 × 10−7 s−1 and ı0 = 4 × 10−8 m3 mmol N−1 s−1 and wmig = 1.2 × 10−5 ms−1 . Numbers in bold face indicate values
that were chosen in accordance with our current knowledge (see Section 2), i.e. that the growth rate of vegetative cells with heterocysts is equal
to ω. Figures in italics indicate that we have used the literature values of ratios between the terms, i.e. that akinetes have a 100-fold lower
mortality than ordinary cells.

Table 3 – Biological parameters for the cyanobacteria EQN-based life cycle model
Internal energy level
Nitrogen quota
Limitation factor for energy
Partitioning factor for internal nitrogen quota
Limitation factor for nitrogen uptake
Limitation factor for light
Critical value for internal quota
Exponent for the energy limitation factor
Value for maximum internal energy quota
Initial slope of the phytoplankton PI-curve
Initial slope of the cyanobacteria PI-curve
Half saturation constant for nitrogen
Grazing rate on phytoplankton
Phytoplankton mortality rate
Remineralization rate
Self-shading parameter
Near-bottom deposition rate
Sinking velocity for detritus
Buoyancy velocity for cyanobacteria
Threshold value for internal energy quota
Threshold value for internal nitrogen quota
Parameter interval for transfer between categories
Inverse transfer time scale between categories
Increased energy consumption factor for ﬁxation
Maximum light capture rate
Maximum nitrogen uptake rate
Maximum nitrogen ﬁxation rate
Maximum growth rate

E(G/C) (non-dimensional)
Q(S/C) (non-dimensional)
E (non-dimensional)
Q (non-dimensional)
N (non-dimensional)
L (non-dimensional)
Qc = 1 (non-dimensional)
n = 20 (non-dimensional)
Emax = 1 (non-dimensional)
˛P = 1.75 × 10−7 m2 W−1 s−1
˛C = 1.75 × 10−7 m2 W−1 s−1
kN = 0.3 mmol N m−3
 = 4.5 × 10−7 m3 mmol N−1 s−1
 = 4.5 × 10−7 s−1
rN = 1.2 × 10−6 s−1
kc = 0.07 m2 (mmol N)−1
ı = 4 × 10−9 m3 mmol N−1 s−1
wsink = 1.2 × 10−6 ms−1
wbuoy (variable)
E = 0.5
Q = 0.5
 = 0.05
 = 2.5 × 10−6 s−1
m=3
ωlc (s−1 )
ωup (s−1 )
ωfx (s−1 )
ωgr ( s−1 )

a few hours to several days (see Table 4). Without more speciﬁc
knowledge about the species under consideration, there is no
reason to choose a speciﬁc set of threshold values, hence we
use E = Q = 0.5 in our cases.2
Although the life cycle concept assumes that the sequence
of stages cannot be reversed (i.e. it is always from VEG to HET
to AKI to REC to VEG) we do not force the transfer between
categories to follow this direction. Hence, the succession of
states is a result of the model, triggered by the changes in the
internal quota and not prescribed a priori.

3.3.2.

Phytoplankton and detritus

For P we assume a temperature-dependent growth rate
(Eppley, 1972) with
P
= 6.8 × 10−6 1.066T
ωgr

(8)

2
Additional experiments with different values showed no more
than quantitative differences, unless extreme values were used.

Table 4 – Physical parameters for the cyanobacteria
EQN-based life cycle model
Depth
Irradiance (PAR)
Surface irradiance (PAR)
Attenuation coefﬁcient
Length of a year
Background vertical mixing coefﬁcient
Wind-induced vertical mixing coefﬁcient
Depth of wind mixing
Annual mean surface temperature
Amplitude of seasonal temperature
variation
Time offset for temperature forcing
Asymmetry factor for annual
temperature cycle

z (m)
I (W m−2 s−1 )
Is (W m−2 s−1 )
kw = 0.1 m−1
a = 360 days
= 1 × 10−5 m2 s−1
Aback
v
Awind
= 1 × 10−3 m2 s−1
v
d = 25 m
A0 = 9.1 ◦ C
As = 9 ◦ C
t0 = 270 days
 = 2.6

212

e c o l o g i c a l m o d e l l i n g 195 (2006) 205–218

Fig. 3 – Seasonal cycle of temperature and nitrogen, phytoplankton and cyanobacteria as a function of depth. The solid line
in (a) denotes the mixed layer depth as deﬁned by the 0.1◦ deviation from the surface value.

and a linear and quadratic mortality, the latter meant to represent grazing by zooplankton. The values for remineralisation,
the sinking and deposition of detritus can be found in the complete listing of model parameters in Table 3.

3.4.

The physical model

This biological formulation, an EQN2×2 type model, is coupled to a one-dimensional physical model that provides the
seasonal cycle of light, temperature and mixing.
The physical model consists of a diffusion equation:
∂
∂
=
∂t
∂z

Av (z, t)

∂
∂z

+ biology

been taken. Vertical mixing is prescribed as
2

+ Awind
e−(z/d) sin4 2
Av (z, t) = Aback
v
v

where the latter term is meant to represent spring and autumn
storms, with their maxima in April and October. Convection
due to static instability is implemented as instantaneous complete homogenisation.
The boundary conditions are speciﬁed as follows: the surface temperature dependence reﬂects the typical seasonal
cycle for mid-latitude water bodies, with a relatively rapid
surface warming in spring and early summer and a gradual
cooling in autumn and winter. Thus we have chosen



(9)

where denotes any of the prognostic variables. The conﬁguration features a one-dimensional (vertical) domain, with a
bottom at 50 m depth. The vertical grid has 1 m resolution.
Initially, the ﬂuid is homogeneous, but due to a seasonally
varying atmospheric temperature, we induce a seasonal cycle
in the model. Solar radiation is assumed to vary daily and seasonally for a latitude of 60◦ N; a constant cloud cover of 70% has

t
a

T(t) = A0 + As cos

2

sinh(t∗ )
sinh()



,

t∗ = 1 −

1
mod(t + t0 , a )
a

with t0 = 270 days, a = 360 days (1 year of 12 equal months),
A0 = 9.1 ◦ C, As = 9 ◦ C and =2.6, resulting in a minimum at the
end of March, a maximum in late July and an amplitude of
18◦ (see Fig. 4a). Salinity effects are not explicitly taken into
account. Thus temperature reﬂects a stably to neutrally stratiﬁed density.

e c o l o g i c a l m o d e l l i n g 195 (2006) 205–218

213

Fig. 4 – Seasonal cycle of near-surface (0–5 m) temperature, phytoplankton and cyanobacteria biomass and the
subcompartments. Maximum concentration of vegetative cells with heterocysts is about 186 mg C m−3 using the Redﬁeld
ratio for conversion of nitrogen to carbon.

For all other variables we assume no ﬂux conditions at the
surface. At the bottom we have also implemented no ﬂux conditions, except for temperature (held at 0◦ ) and nitrogen (held
at 15 mmol N m−3 ). Finally, migration and sinking are included
through an upstream advection scheme, which for our vertical
grid has a maximum implicit diffusion of Av = 6 × 10−5 m2 s−1 ,
a value not causing excessive diffusivity.

4.

Results

Our coupled physical-cyanobacteria life cycle model has been
run for several decades forced with a perpetual seasonal
cycle of temperature, wind and irradiance. The model requires
about 6 years for spin-up. After that the seasonal cycle of all
variables is periodic.

4.1.

Seasonal cycle

We begin with a description of the seasonal cycle of the physical, chemical and biological components of the model (see
Fig. 3).
Low winter temperatures lead to a homogenisation of
the water column (with nitrogen concentrations of about
10 mmol N m−3 ) almost down to the bottom in mid-March (Fig.
3a). The increase in temperature and solar radiation in the
beginning of April results in rapid shallowing of the mixed
layer depth and enables the phytoplankton to take up nitrogen
and grow. Maximum concentrations of phytoplankton occur at
the end of April; from the beginning of May onwards nitrogen
concentrations are depleted at the surface (<0.1 mmol N m−3 )
and lead to a decline of the spring bloom. During June and July
slightly enhanced subsurface concentrations of phytoplankton can still be found in the nutricline where higher nitrogen
concentrations support a sustainable growth at lower irradiance levels.
The high surface temperatures from mid-June to the beginning of September favour the growth of cyanobacteria. Their
ability to ﬁx N2 and grow independent of the available dis-

solved inorganic nitrogen concentrations lead to high surface
concentrations with a maximum at the end of July/beginning
of August. The small buoyancy of the cells results in a surface accumulation of biomass in the upper 5 m. The surface bloom of cyanobacteria strongly reduces the penetration
of solar radiation and shade the subsurface phytoplankton
which almost disappear before the end of July.
The decline of surface temperatures below 13 ◦ C ends the
growth of cyanobacteria relatively rapidly. At the same time,
the combined effects of remineralisation of dead organic
material (enhanced by the cyanobacterial assimilation of N2
into biomass) and increased wind and thermal mixing in
autumn lead to higher surface concentrations of nitrogen.
Phytoplankton responds to the newly available nitrogen and a
small bloom in September/October appears. However, further
decreasing irradiance and temperatures as well as increasing
wind results in a deepening of the mixed layer depth and a
low phytoplankton stock throughout the winter.
This sequence of events and biomass occurrences is representative of what we would observe in some lakes and midlatitude coastal areas and is thus an illustration of the model’s
capability to capture the main processes.

4.2.

Cyanobacteria life cycle

We now turn to the sequence of cyanobacteria life stages,
which is illustrated in Fig. 4, along with the temperature and
phytoplankton cycle in the surface layer (0–5 m). As pointed
out before, we do not explicitly prescribe a unidirectional
transfer between the different life stages, nonetheless, the
alterations in the internal quotas lead to a succession of the
phases in agreement with the current knowledge: the ﬁrst
noticeable cyanobacteria biomass in the surface layer occurs
end of May/beginning of June induced by the ascending, nongrowing so-called “recruiting cyanobacteria”. The intracellular
nitrogen of the recruiting cyanobacteria is high due to their
nitrogen uptake in the nitrogen repleted environment of the
deeper layers. Light capture near the surface further replenishes their energy storage which induces a transfer into vege-

214

e c o l o g i c a l m o d e l l i n g 195 (2006) 205–218

Fig. 5 – Time series of near-surface (0–5 m) variables in a run with interannual temperature variations.

tative cells. The vegetative cyanobacteria grow on the basis of
their internal nitrogen and energy storage. However, due to the
depletion of nitrogen in the surface water their growth cannot
be long and does not lead to high concentrations. Instead, they
are transferred to vegetative cells with heterocysts which can
ﬁx nitrogen and grow to substantial concentrations. A decline
in solar radiation and energy uptake leads soon to a reduced
internal energy quota. This results in a transfer to akinetes,
which sink out of the euphotic zone quickly. Akinetes overwinter on the sediment where they slowly take up energy and
nitrogen. (Since the winter mixing does not penetrate to the
bottom, they are not entrained into the surface mixed layer by
this physical process.) In late spring when the internal nitrogen is ﬁlled, germination and recolonisation of the cells take
place again.
It should be noted that a complete interruption of the life
cycle at any stage (either by disabling the transfer or by setting the concentration to zero) will lead to an extinction of the
cyanobacteria, i.e. all stages are of equal importance.

4.3.

Interannual variations

The strong temperature dependence of cyanobacteria growth
in the range 10–20 ◦ C leads us to expect a strong interannual

variability. We have tested this by smoothly varying the surface temperature curve between 90 and 110% over a period of
10 years (Fig. 5).
We ﬁnd that variations in summer temperature strongly
inﬂuence the amount of biomass of different stages. Whereas
warm summer temperatures favour the growth of vegetative
cells and heterocysts, cold summers lead to a larger abundance of germinates. Lower temperatures reduce the energy
uptake in the recruiting stage and thus the internal energy
is not sufﬁcient to develop into vegetative cells and to later
form heterocysts. In succession, akinete formation is strongly
reduced and thus recruitment is also less in the following year,
even when summer temperatures are high enough to support larger growth. Thus, years with relatively warm temperatures following years with cold summers are characterised by
reduced maximum cyanobacteria concentrations. Our results
demonstrate that the history of the life cycle is important for
bloom formation.
As a consequence, the prediction of the occurrence of
strong blooms from the recruitment biomass earlier in the
year is not straightforward, as the correlation between the
amplitude of vegetative cells plus heterocysts (HET) and
recruiting cells (REC) is relatively low, depending on the abundance of cyanobacteria from the previous year(s) (Fig. 6a). In

e c o l o g i c a l m o d e l l i n g 195 (2006) 205–218

215

Fig. 6 – Correlation between (a) HET and REC in an experiment with interannual varying maximum summer temperature;
(b) the HET/REC ratio and maximum summer temperature; (c) HET and REC in an experiment with varying akinete
deposition; and (d) HET and the coefﬁcient for quadratic deposition of akinetes in the previous year.

general, lower REC concentrations are correlated with higher
HET concentrations, but the hysteresis curve shows that there
are signiﬁcant differences depending on the long-term variations of temperature. Thus, different bloom strengths can be
found for a given temperature.
A look at the temperature dependence of the ratio between
HET and REC (Fig. 6b) reveals that this ratio is temperaturedependent itself, i.e. in warm years HET may be up to 100 times
larger than REC, but in relatively cold years, this ratio is only
2–5. Even though the correlation coefﬁcient is quite high, signiﬁcant differences remain between gradually warming and
cooling climate.
This clearly illustrates that the magnitude of this year’s
bloom is a function of what happened during the past year(s),
and so strong blooms can be the result of last year’s strong
bloom, or even the consequence of delayed maturing from
earlier years. Prediction would then be quite difﬁcult without
detailed knowledge about all stages of cyanobacterial life
cycle.
To illustrate this, we have performed another experiment
in which the deposition coefﬁcient (ı) was changed once a year,
representing an interannually varying rate of loss of akinete
biomass near the bottom. The results show that the bloom
amplitude (indicated by HET concentrations) linearly depend
on the recruiting stage cell biomass (Fig. 6c), but are totally
uncorrelated with the deposition rate of the current year (not
shown). Looking backward in time, however, we ﬁnd a striking
quadratic correlation between the deposition rate during the
previous year and the bloom amplitude in the current year
(Fig. 6d).
We have investigated another sensitivity of the system, by
varying the background (low temperature) time scale for light
capture. Instead of taking 1 year, a “maturation time” of 240
and 480 days has been chosen. The shorter time scale leads to
an early bloom of recruiting cells (in this case simultaneous
to the spring bloom of phytoplankton); the longer time scale
causes a bi-annual periodicity in the occurrence of strong
blooms.3

3
It is interesting to note that exactly such a bi-annual oscillation seems to be the dominant signal in multi-year observations
by Kovács et al. (2003), who however, do not address this phenomenon.

5.

Discussion and conclusions

We have presented a model for the life cycle of cyanobacteria. Considering the internal nitrogen and energy quotas,
the model distinguishes between the different development
phases (meant to represent distinctive stages in the life cycle)
and furthermore reproduces the formation of cyanobacteria
blooms in the summer.
Although the model suggests a high probability of large
blooms when temperature is high, there is no 1:1 correlation
between temperature and blooms. Whereas the ﬁrst outcome
can be also reproduced with a simple cyanobacteria model
(one compartment) which includes a temperature-dependent
growth rate, the latter cannot be covered by simple models
without taking into account other limiting factors (e.g. phosphate).
Our results show that deceleration and acceleration processes within the life cycle and the life history of cyanobacteria are important for the bloom formation. A feedback exists
between the magnitude of the summer bloom, akinete formation and the bloom formation in the following year. Such
a relationship is in agreement with the reported high correlation between locations of sedimented akinetes and blooms
(Huber, 1984).
The fraction of recruitment cells in the total population
has been reported to vary strongly between years, locations
and species from barely noticeable to substantial (Barbiero
and Welch, 1992; Karlsson-Elfgren et al., 2003). Our simulation with interannual varying sea surface temperature shows
the same phenomenon: recruiting cells contribute between
1 and 50% to the summer biomass and no obvious correlation between recruitment and bloom-forming biomass can
be found. It is, however, noteworthy that both observations
(Barbiero and Welch, 1992) and model simulations indicate
that in years with a reduced population (lower biomass)
the fraction of recruitment is higher than in years with a
large bloom. Our model results suggest the following explanation: any deceleration in the maturating processes during
the recruitment stage leads to an accumulation of recruiting
cells, while any acceleration causes a fast transfer into the
growing stages. In our simulations, the main factor is temperature; relatively colder temperatures abate light capture
and nitrogen uptake and therefore a transfer into vegeta-

216

e c o l o g i c a l m o d e l l i n g 195 (2006) 205–218

tive cells and heterocysts takes longer or is even is inhibited. In contrast, relatively higher temperatures accelerate
light capture and nitrogen uptake and cause a rapid transfer into the growing stages followed by extensive growth. In
nature, also other favourable or unfavourable conditions (e.g.
the availability of micronutrients) might affect these maturating processes, leading to the observed composition of the
populations.
Cases in which the same abundance of akinetes in a lake
sediment do or do not lead to a bloom (Kovács et al., 2003) can
be interpreted in two ways: obviously, external factors (e.g.
temperature) could directly be responsible. But an equally
plausible explanation based on the life cycle dynamics is that
the maturity of the akinetes was different in both years (as
abundance does not directly relate to the level of maturity).
To conclude from these observations that akinetes play only
a minor role in bloom formation, however, appears far less
convincing.
Prediction of the occurrence and strength of harmful
cyanobacteria blooms is an important task of environmental
management. Usually, a number of environmental parameters, e.g. temperature, N/P-ratio etc. are taken into account,
which, however, turn out to be insufﬁcient for an accurate prediction (Downing et al., 2001; Ferber et al., 2004). So far, the
life cycle dynamics are totally neglected. Our model results
suggest that an important step towards an improved understanding and ﬁnally prediction of cyanobacteria blooms is the
consideration of the life cycle and in particular the “historical”
(or last years’) blooms.
Finally, we propose that a particularly important aspect is
sediment agitation: relatively small changes in the deposition
rate of akinetes signiﬁcantly affect the whole life cycle and in
particular bloom formation in the next year even with no interannual temperature variability. This sensitivity is also found
in several observations where sediment resuspension strongly
enhances the germination of akinetes (e.g. Karlsson-Elfgren et
al., 2004; Rengefors et al., 2004). Forecasts without the information about sediment transport and agitation might hence
not be successful.

6.

Summary and outlook

We have developed a life cycle model for cyanobacteria which distinguishes between four different life cycle
phases, two growth and two resting (maturing) phases. These
stages are characterised by different internal energy and
nitrogen quotas. The seasonal succession of stages reproduces many observed phenomena (e.g. the appearance of
cyanobacteria after phytoplankton spring blooms, and the
summer blooms of nitrogen ﬁxing vegetative cells with
heterocysts).
The results of our simulations indicate that the life history strongly determines the formation of blooms. In particular, no 1:1 correlation exists between undoubtedly important external parameters (here: temperature) and cyanobacteria; instead the evolution during resting and maturing
life stages seem to be equally or even more important.
The consideration of the life cycle stages and life cycle
stage transitions, respectively, helps to explain observed

phenomena related to cyanobacteria dynamics in aquatic
systems:

• higher (lower) proportion of recruitment biomass in years

•

with a reduced (increased) summer bloom is due to a
deceleration (acceleration) within the life cycle affecting
the transfer into or development of subsequent life cycle
stages, when environmental conditions are less (more)
favourable.
the same abundances of akinetes in the sediment in different years might induce a bloom or not, independent
of external parameters. If the maturation period is about
1 year, a bloom is likely; if it is longer (either due to the
characteristics of the species, or the prevailing conditions
in the near-bottom layer) germination and blooms may be
delayed by one or more years.

We conclude that a comprehensive understanding of
cyanobacteria bloom formation likely requires the consideration of both environmental factors and life history of the
species.
Due to its relative simplicity, our model is easily adjustable
to different cyanobacteria species (or phytoplankton species
with a pronounced non-sexual life cycle) to address certain
aspects of their life cycle dynamics. In particular, it offers
the opportunity to investigate the importance of additional
external and internal factors and processes, like variations in
winter or summer temperatures, light attenuation in water,
additional sources of nutrient load, life stage threshold values,
sinking velocities, temperature dependence of growth rates,
and maturation times. Furthermore, the model can be coupled to a 3D-OGCM to investigate the full spectrum of marine
and limnic dynamics including sediment transport.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Jaana Lehtimäki for providing
the data of the temperature-dependent growth rates for Nodularia spumigena. The comments of two anonymous reviewers
are gratefully acknowledged.

references

Adams, D.G., Duggan, P.S., 1999. Heterocyst and akinete
differentiation in cyanobacteria. Tansley Review No. 107. New
Phytol. 144, 3–33.
Arhonditsis, G.B., Brett, M.T., 2005a. Eutrophication model for
Lake Washington, USA. Part I. Model description and
sensitivity analysis. Ecol. Model. 187, 140–178.
Arhonditsis, G.B., Brett, M.T., 2005b. Eutrophication model for
Lake Washington, USA. Part II. Model calibration and system
dynamics analysis. Ecol. Model. 187, 179–200.
Baird, M.E., Oke, P.R., Suthers, I.M., Middleton, J.H., 2004. A
plankton population model with biomechanical descriptions
of biological processes in an idealized 2D ocean basin. J. Mar.
Syst. 50, 199–222.
Barbiero, R.P., 1993. A contribution to the life history of the
planktonic cyanophyte Gloeotricha echinulata. Arch. Hydrobiol.
127, 87–100.
Barbiero, R.P., Welch, E.B., 1992. Contribution of benthic
blue-green algal recruitment to lake populations and
phosphorous translocation. Freshwater Biol. 27, 249–260.

e c o l o g i c a l m o d e l l i n g 195 (2006) 205–218

Beckmann, A., Hense, I., 2004. Torn between extremes: the ups
and downs of phytoplankton. Ocean Dyn. 54, 581–592.
Codd, G.A., Bell, S.G., Kaya, K., Ward, C.J., Beattie, K.A., Metcalf,
J.S., 1999. Cyanobacterial toxins, exposure routes and human
health. Eur. J. Phycol. 34, 405–415.
Damerval, T., Guglielmi, G., Houmard, J., de Marsac, N.T., 1991.
Hormogonium differentiation in the cyanobacterium
Calothrix: a photoregulated developmental process. The Plant
Cell 3, 191–201.
Downing, J.A., Watson, S.B., McCaule, E., 2001. Predicting
cyanobacteria dominance in lakes. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 58,
1905–1908.
Droop, M.R., 1973. Some thoughts on nutrient limitation in algae.
J. Phycol. 9, 227–264.
Eppley, R.W., 1972. Temperature and phytoplankton growth in the
sea. Fish. Bull. 70 (4), 1063–1085.
Fennel, W., 2001. Modeling of copepods with links to circulation
model. J. Plankton Res. 23, 1217–1232.
Ferber, L.R., Levine, S.N., Lini, A., Livingston, G.P., 2004. Do
cyanobacteria dominate in eutrophic lakes because they ﬁx
nitrogen?. Freshwater Biol. 49, 690–708.
Fogg, G.E., Stewart, W.D.P., Fay, P., Walsby, A.E., 1973. The
Blue-Green Algae. Academic Press.
Geider, R.J., MacIntyre, H.L., Kana, T.M., 1998. A dynamic
regulatory model of phytoplanktonic acclimation to light,
nutrients, and temperature. Limnol. Oceanogr. 43 (4), 679–
694.
Howarth, R.W., Chan, F., Marino, R., 1999. Do top-down and
bottom-up controls interact to exclude nitrogen-ﬁxing
cyanobacteria from the plankton of estuaries:
explorations with a simulation model. Biogeochemistry 46
(1–3), 203–231.
Howarth, R.W., Marino, R., Cole, J.J., 1988. Nitrogen ﬁxation in
freshwater, estuarine, and marine ecosystems. 2.
Biogeochemical controls. Limnol. Oceanogr. 33, 688–701.
Huber, A.L., 1984. Nodularia (Cyanobacteriaceae) akinetes in the
sediments of the Peel-Harvey Estuary, Western Australia:
potential inoculum source for Nodularia blooms. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 47 (2), 234–238.
Huber, A.L., Hamel, K.S., 1985. Phosphatase activities in relation
to phosphorus nutrition in Nodularia spumigena
(Cyanobacteriaceae). Hydrobiologia 123, 145–152.
Janowitz, G.S., Kamykowski, D., 1999. An expanded Eulerian
model of phytoplankton environmental response. Ecol. Model.
118, 237–247.
Kahru, M., Horstmann, U., Rud, O., 1994. Satellite detection of
increased cyanobacteria blooms in the Baltic Sea: natural
ﬂuctuation or ecosystem change?. Ambio 23 (8), 469–472.
Kahru, M., Leppänen, J.M., Rud, O., Savchuk, O.P., 2000.
Cyanobacteria blooms in the Gulf of Finland triggered by
saltwater inﬂow into the Baltic Sea. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 207,
13–18.
Karl, D., Letelier, R., Tupas, L., Dore, J., Christian, J., Hebel, D., 1997.
The role of nitrogen ﬁxation in biogeochemical cycling in the
subtropical North Paciﬁc Ocean. Nature 388, 533–538.
Karlsson, I., 1999. On the germination of the akinete-forming
cyanobacterium Gloeotrichia echinulata in Lake Erken, Sweden.
Arch. Hydrobiol. Algolog. Stud. 94, 175–180.
Karlsson-Elfgren, I., Rengefors, K., Gustafsson, S., 2004. Factors
regulating recruitment from the sediment to the water
column in the bloom-forming cyanobacterium Gloeotrichia
echinulata. Freshwater Biol. 49 (3), 265–273.
Karlsson-Elfgren, I., Rydin, E., Hyenstrand, P., Pettersson, K.,
2003. Recruitment and pelagic growth of Gloeotrichia
echinulata (Cyanophyceae) in Lake Erken. J. Phycol. 39,
1050–1056.
Kovács, A.W., Koncz, E., Vörös, L., 2003. Akinete abundance of
N2 -ﬁxing cyanobacteria in sediment of Lake Balaton
(Hungary). Hydrobiologia 506–509, 181–188.

217

LaRoche, J., Breitbarth, E., 2005. Importance of the diazotrophs as
a source of new nitrogen in the ocean. J. Sea Res. 53 (1/2),
67–91.
Larsson, U., Hajdu, S., Walve, J., Elmgren, R., 2001. Baltic Sea
nitrogen ﬁxation estimated from the summer increase in
upper mixed layer total nitrogen. Limnol. Oceanogr. 46 (4),
811–820.
Lehtimäki, J., Moisander, P., Sivonen, K., Kononen, K., 1997.
Growth, nitrogen ﬁxation and nodularin production by two
Baltic Sea cyanobacteria. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 63,
1647–1656.
Meeks, J.C., Elhai, J., 2002. Regulation of cellular differentiation in
ﬁlamentous cyanobacteria in free-living and plant-associated
symbiotic growth states. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 66 (1),
94–121.
Miller, C.B., Lynch, D.R., Carlotti, F., Gentleman, W., Lewis,
C.V.W., 1998. Coupling of an individual-based population
dynamic model of C. ﬁnmarchicus to a circulationn model
for the Georges Bank region. Fish. Oceanogr. 7 (3/4), 219–
234.
Mulholland, M.R., Floge, S., Carpenter, E.J., Carpone, D.G., 2002.
Phosphorus dynamics in cultures and natural populations of
Trichodesmium spp. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 239, 45–55.
Neumann, T., Fennel, W., Kremp, C., 2002. Experimental
simulations with an ecosystem model of the Baltic Sea: a
nutrient load reduction experiment. Glob. Biogeochem. Cycl.
16 (3), doi:10.1029/2001GB001450.
Oliver, R.L., 1994. Floating and sinking in gas-vacuolate
cyanobacteria. J. Phycol. 30, 161–173.
Rengefors, K., Gustafsson, S., Ståhl-Delbanco, A., 2004. Factors
regulating the recruitment of cyanobacterial and eukaryotic
phytoplankton from littoral and profundal sediments. Aquat.
Microb. Ecol. 36, 213–226.
Robarts, R.D., Zohary, T., 1987. Temperature effects on
photosynthetic capacity, respiration, and growth rates of
bloom-forming cyanobacteria. N. Z. J. Mar. Freshwater Res. 21,
391–399.
Robson, B.J., Hamilton, D.P., 2004. Three-dimensional modelling
of a Microcystis bloom event in the Swan River estuary,
Western Australia. Ecol. Model. 174, 203–222.
Rouhilainen, L., Sivonen, K., Buikema, W.J., Haselkorn, R., 1995.
Characterization of toxin-producing cyanobacteria by using
an oligonucleotide probe containing a tandemly repeated
heptamer. J. Bacteriol. 177 (20), 6021–6026.
Sellner, K.G., Doucette, G.J., Kirkpatrick, G.J., 2003. Harmful algal
blooms: causes, impacts and detection. J. Ind. Microbiol.
Biotechnol. 30, 383–406.
Smith, A.J., 1982. Modes of cyanobacterial carbon metabolism.
In: Carr, N.G., Whitton, B.A. (Eds.), The Biology of
Cyanobacteria. Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications, Oxford, pp.
47–86.
Ståhl-Delbanco, A., Hansson, L.-A., Gyllström, M., 2003.
Recruitment of resting stages may induce blooms of
Microcystis at low N:P ratios. J. Plankton Res. 25 (9), 1099–
1106.
Stephens, N., Flynn, K.J., Gallon, J.R., 2003. Interrelationships
between the pathways of inorganic nitrogen assimilation in
the cyanobacterium Gloeothece can be described using a
mechanistic mathematical model. New Phytol. 160,
545–555.
Sutherland, J.M., Herdman, M., Stewart, W.D.P., 1979. Akinetes of
the cyanobacterium Nostoc pcc 7524: macromolecular
composition, structure and control of differentiation. J. Gen.
Microbiol. 115, 273–287.
Trimbee, A.M., Prepas, E.E., 1988. The effect of oxygen depletion
on the timing and magnitude of blue-green algal blooms.
Verh. Int. Ver. Limnol. 23, 220–226.
Verspagen, J.M.H., Snelder, E.O.F.M., Visser, P.M., Huisman, J.,
Ibelings, B.W., Mur, L.R., 2004. Recruitment of benthic

218

e c o l o g i c a l m o d e l l i n g 195 (2006) 205–218

Microcystis Cyanophyceae to the water column: internal
buoyancy changes or resuspension?. J. Phycol. 40 (2),
260–270.
Villareal, T.A., Carpenter, E.J., 2003. Buoyancy regulation and the
potential for vertical migration in the oceanic cyanobacterium
Trichodesmium. Microb. Ecol. 45 (1), 1–10.
Walsby, A.E., Hayes, P.K., Boje, R., 1995. The gas vesicles,
buoyancy and vertical distribution of cyanobacteria in the
Baltic Sea. J. Phycol. 30, 87–94.
Webster, K.E., Peters, R.H., 1978. Some size-dependent inhibitions
of larger cladoceran ﬁlterers in ﬁlamentous suspensions.
Limnol. Oceanogr. 23, 1238–1245.

Yamamoto, T., Seike, T., 2003. Modelling the population dynamics
of the toxic dinoﬂagellate Alexandrium tamarense in Hiroshima
Bay, Japan. II. Sensitivity to physical and biological
parameters. J. Plankton Res. 25 (1), 63–81.
Yamamoto, T., Seike, T., Hashimoto, T., Tarutani, K., 2002.
Modelling the population dynamics of the toxic dinoﬂagellate
Alexandrium tamarense in Hiroshima Bay, Japan. J. Plankton
Res. 24 (1), 33–47.
Yamamoto, Y., 1995. Effect of desiccation on the germination of
akinetes of Anabaena cylindrical. Plant Cell Physiol. 16, 749–
752.

